Roth IRA vs. 401(k)
Learn about 2 tax-advantaged retirement accounts.
Fidelity Learn

Key takeaways
Both Roth IRAs and 401(k)s offer tax advantages for retirement savings, but details differ for contributions, withdrawals, and taxes.
Contributions to Roth IRAs are after-tax, with potentially tax-free withdrawals later. Traditional 401(k)s offer pre-tax contributions with tax-deferred growth.
401(k) plans have higher contribution limits and could include an employer match.
Higher earners may not qualify to contribute to a Roth IRA.
While sketching out your retirement planning roadmap, you’ll likely encounter 2 popular ways to save and invest: the Roth IRA and the 401(k). Both types of retirement accounts offer tax advantages as a primary benefit, but there are important differences. Here are some of the similarities and differences between the 2 account types.
What is a Roth IRA?
A Roth IRA allows eligible contributors to invest money they’ve already paid taxes on. The account allows withdrawals of your contributions at any time without taxes or penalties; however, withdrawals of earnings are tax-free after age 59½ and once the Roth IRA 5-year rule has been met. You could invest in a range of investment options, including stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs). Unlike a 401(k), a Roth IRA is self-funded and self-managed, meaning individuals can set up the account independent of an employer.

Advantages of Roth IRAs

Roth IRAs have many benefits that can attract retirement savers:

A Roth IRA allows your money to grow tax-free, with potentially tax-free withdrawals in retirement (if certain requirements are met).1
Before age 59½, you could withdraw your contributions anytime from your Roth IRA—but not investment earnings—without paying taxes or penalties.
You can contribute to your Roth IRA as long as your earnings are below the IRS income limits. There are no age limits for contributing.
There are no required minimum distributions or RMDs, an amount you’re obligated to take out of certain tax-advantaged accounts each year after you reach a certain age.
Disadvantages of Roth IRAs

It’s wise to consider these potential downsides to Roth IRAs:

Since Roth IRA contributions are made using after-tax income, account holders don't get to take a deduction for their contributions.
If you withdraw investment earnings before age 59½, you’ll generally pay income taxes plus an additional 10% penalty.
Unlike many 401(k) plans, Roth IRAs are set up individually and don’t offer employer matching contributions.
IRAs have a comparatively low annual contribution limit.
The annual contribution limit for IRAs, including Roth and traditional IRAs, is $7,500 for 2026. If you're age 50 or older, you can contribute an additional $1,100 for 2026.

Roth IRA income limits mean some higher earners may not be able to contribute.
For 2026, you can make full contributions to your Roth IRA if your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is less than $153,000 for a single adult and $242,000 if married and filing jointly.

Related: How much can you contribute to a traditional or Roth IRA in 2026?
What is a 401(k)?
A 401(k) allows you to put some of each paycheck into a retirement account. Contributions to traditional 401(k)s are usually made before paying taxes, with some employers matching a portion of the money you stash away for retirement. You could invest your dollars in employer-selected options, most often including index funds and target date funds. Since money in a traditional 401(k) is contributed pre-tax, you pay income taxes on withdrawals in retirement, but the money grows tax-deferred while it stays in the account.

There’s also something called a Roth 401(k), which is a kind of hybrid between a Roth IRA and a 401(k), with some rules from each kind of plan.

Advantages of 401(k) plans

Traditional 401(k) plans offer several benefits:

Contributions are automatically deducted from your paycheck, without the need to manually transfer money.
Contributions reduce your taxable income for that year.
If you change jobs, you have options, including rolling over the money from your old employer's plan to the new employer's plan.
Your investments could grow tax-deferred until the time of withdrawal.
Most employers offer 401(k) matching, contributing additional dollars to your retirement account.
Other employers may make nonelective contributions, which means they'll contribute to your 401(k) even if you choose not to.
The annual contribution limit for a 401(k) is comparatively high, giving you more opportunity to save in a tax-advantaged way. Note: If you're over 50 and your employer plan offers catch-up contributions, you may be able to save even more.
In 2026, you can contribute up to $24,500 pre-tax or Roth to your 401(k). Some plans may allow after-tax contributions up to the combined employee and employer limit of $72,000. If you're at least age 50 at the end of the calendar year, you can add a pre-tax or Roth catch-up contribution of $8,000 (or $11,250 if age 60–63, if your plan allows).

According to the SECURE 2.0 Act's higher earner rule, in 2026, catch-up contributions for earners whose FICA wages (typically Box 3 of Form W-2) exceed $150,000 in the previous tax year, must be designated as Roth after-tax contributions.

If your employer's plan does not offer a Roth contribution feature and you fall under the high-earner rule, you won't be able to make catch-up contributions to that plan.

Disadvantages of 401(k) plans

Keep these considerations in mind before investing in a traditional 401(k):

The plan may have more limited options for investments compared to other retirement accounts.
If you withdraw from your 401(k) before age 59½, you may have to pay a 10% penalty, along with income taxes on the amount you withdraw.
In the event of an immediate and heavy financial need, taxes and penalties may still apply to a hardship 401(k) withdrawal.
You generally need to start taking RMDs from your 401(k) account the year you turn age 73. RMDs could increase taxable income in retirement.
Starting in 2026, those with 2025 wages of greater than $150,000 must make their catch-up contributions to a Roth balance. This means high earners may no longer receive an upfront tax break when making catch-up contributions.
Related: New 401(k) rules for 2026

Similarities between Roth IRAs and 401(k)s
Because they’re both retirement accounts, these 2 accounts have some common features:

Both Roth IRAs and 401(k)s encourage long-term investing to help maximize your retirement funds.
Each account allows for a diversified portfolio that spreads risk across different investments.
Each offers tax advantages.
Both accounts allow those age 50 and older to make catch-up contributions.
Differences between Roth IRAs and 401(k)s
There are several ways these 2 accounts aren’t alike:

The annual contribution limit for a 401(k) is much higher than what you can contribute to a Roth IRA.
Unlike a 401(k), a Roth IRA has an income cap, making some higher earners ineligible to contribute.
Contributions to a traditional 401(k) reduce taxable income; contributions to a Roth IRA don’t.
Roth IRAs allow you to withdraw your contributions at any time tax- and penalty-free, while 401(k)s generally impose taxes and a 10% penalty on early withdrawals.
Since the employer offers 401(k) plans, the account also allows for employer contributions, whereas a Roth IRA is funded only by the account holder.
Roth IRAs provide tax-free withdrawals in retirement if qualified,1 while traditional 401(k)s offer tax-deferred growth with taxes on withdrawals.
Some 401(k) plans may allow savers age 60–63 to contribute even more than savers age 50–59 and 64 and over.
Making a catch-up contribution to a Roth IRA means you'll have additional Roth dollars on top of your normal contribution limit. High earners making catch-up contributions to a 401(k) may be forced into making Roth catch-up contributions. This may even be true if their non-catch-up contributions are exclusively to a traditional 401(k) balance.
Is a 401(k) an IRA?

No, a 401(k) is not an IRA. IRAs and workplace plans, like 401(k)s, are distinct types of retirement accounts with different structures, contribution limits, and tax rules. An IRA allows individuals to contribute and manage their investments independently, while typically an employer sponsors a 401(k), with a more limited set of investment choices.

Roth IRA vs 401(k): How to choose
It’s possible to be eligible to contribute to both a Roth IRA and a 401(k) and to make contributions to each at the same time. If you’re deciding which to fund first, consider prioritizing contributions to your 401(k) to capture the full employer match, if offered. Once you’re getting the maximum employer match, you could contribute to a Roth IRA to benefit from tax-free withdrawals in retirement.

Can you have a Roth IRA and a 401(k)?
Yes, you can have both a Roth IRA and a 401(k). If you’re eligible to contribute to both a Roth IRA and a 401(k), the annual contribution limits are separate from each other—you may contribute up to the maximum for each account type.

Am I eligible to contribute to a Roth IRA?
Your eligibility to contribute to a Roth IRA depends on your annual income. Even if your income is too high to contribute the annual maximum, you may be able to make a partial contribution.

You can open and contribute to your Roth IRA as long as you have a taxable income under the yearly IRS limits.

For 2026, you can make full contributions to your Roth IRA if your modified adjusted gross income (MAGI) is less than $153,000 for a single adult, partial contributions for MAGI between $153,000 and $168,000 and no contributions with a MAGI $168,000 or higher.

Married couples filing jointly for 2026 can make the maximum contribution if their MAGI is less than $242,000. They can make partial contributions if their 2026 MAGI is more than $242,000 but less than $252,000. Married couples filing jointly whose 2026 MAGI is $252,000 or higher can't contribute directly to a Roth IRA.

Calculate how much you’re eligible to contribute.

If you earn more than these limits, you still have options for getting tax-free withdrawals. You might consider a Roth 401(k) if available from your employer because it has no income restrictions. Or you could consider a backdoor Roth IRA, a strategy of converting nondeductible contributions in a traditional IRA to a Roth IRA. It may not make sense for everyone, particularly those who have large amounts of traditional IRA contributions that have already been deducted from their taxes. If you’re evaluating the strategy, it’s always a good idea to consult with a tax professional to discuss the timing, the potential tax impact, and the process.

How to invest through a 401(k)
To invest through a 401(k), follow these directions.

1. Enroll in your employer’s 401(k) plan

If you’re not automatically signed up, you can do it yourself through your employer’s online portal or by asking for guidance from the human resources department.

2. Decide how much to contribute

Once you’re enrolled, find out the maximum contribution your employer will match dollar for dollar, and try to budget to get as much of that match as possible. Then specify what percentage of your paycheck you’d like automatically deducted and contributed toward your 401(k). Contributions may then be invested in a default fund, such as a target date fund that offers a mix of stocks and bonds that gradually adjusts to be more conservative as your goal date approaches.

3. Choose your investments

Most plans offer a variety of investments, and it’s wise to consider your options before picking. You may decide the default fund is right for you and keep directing your contributions there. Or you may decide to put a little or none there.

4. Check in on your investments

At least once a year, review your portfolio. Consider selling investments and buying new ones to keep your investment mix aligned with your goals. You also may have access to professional management through the firm that houses your account, which you could consider taking advantage of if you’d like additional guidance. Just be aware of any fees they may charge.

How to invest through a Roth IRA
Take these steps if you’d like to set up a Roth IRA.

1. Choose a financial institution that offers the account and open it

Compare a few different options. Weigh up the fees they charge, minimum investments they mandate, and tools they offer. Ask yourself these 5 questions before you choose a broker. Once you’ve chosen a broker, submit the required information to open the account.

2. Fund the account

You can contribute up to the annual limit through anything from a bank transfer to a check deposit, depending on your provider. You may also transfer assets from an existing IRA at a different provider, but keep in mind that this does not count toward the annual contribution limit.

3. Choose your investments

Unlike a 401(k), you’ll need to actively pick investments on your own, since there are no default options.

4. Check in on your investments

Reassess them at least annually to check they’re still in line with your financial goals and timeframe.
